.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

## Description:
<!-- Please include a summary of the change and which issue is fixed. Please also include relevant motivation and context.-->

## Test Plan:
<!-- Please describe what tests you have performed to verify your changes. This can help the reviewer understand how they can verify the changes. -->

## Pull Request Checklist:

Before submitting your PR, ensure you have completed the following tasks:

### New Feature:
- [ ] **Example Added**: Added a new example under [`examples/`](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/tree/main/examples) to showcase the new feature.
- [ ] **Tests**: Included tests that cover the new feature or changes.
- [ ] **Documentation**: Updated the documentation to reflect the introduction of the new feature or changes.

### Bug Fix:
- [ ] **Tests**: Included tests that cover the bug fix (fails on main/works on this branch).

### Change in `pixi.toml` format:
- [ ] **Docs Updated**: Updated the documentation related to `pixi.toml` format at [docs/configuration.md](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/blob/main/docs/configuration.md).
- [ ] **Schema Updated**: Updated the schema definition at [schema/model.py](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/blob/main/schema/model.py) if applicable.

### Documentation Change:
If you've made changes to the documentation, please ensure it's reflected across all relevant repositories:
- [ ] Updated [`pixi-pycharm`](https://github.com/pavelzw/pixi-pycharm) documentation if relevant.
- [ ] Updated [`setup-pixi`](https://github.com/prefix-dev/setup-pixi) documentation if relevant.

Commit message:

misc: add mention to only select if applicable

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

## Description:
<!-- Please include a summary of the change and which issue is fixed. Please also include relevant motivation and context.-->

## Test Plan:
<!-- Please describe what tests you have performed to verify your changes. This can help the reviewer understand how they can verify the changes. -->

## Pull Request Checklist:

Before submitting your PR, ensure you have completed the following tasks, when applicable. Check the boxes that apply to this PR:

### New Feature:
- [ ] **Example Added**: Added a new example under [`examples/`](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/tree/main/examples) to showcase the new feature.
- [ ] **Tests**: Included tests that cover the new feature or changes.
- [ ] **Documentation**: Updated the documentation to reflect the introduction of the new feature or changes.

### Bug Fix:
- [ ] **Tests**: Included tests that cover the bug fix (fails on main/works on this branch).

### Change in `pixi.toml` format:
- [ ] **Docs Updated**: Updated the documentation related to `pixi.toml` format at [docs/configuration.md](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/blob/main/docs/configuration.md).
- [ ] **Schema Updated**: Updated the schema definition at [schema/model.py](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/blob/main/schema/model.py) if applicable.

### Documentation Change:
If you've made changes to the documentation, please ensure it's reflected across all relevant repositories:
- [ ] Updated [`pixi-pycharm`](https://github.com/pavelzw/pixi-pycharm) documentation if relevant.
- [ ] Updated [`setup-pixi`](https://github.com/prefix-dev/setup-pixi) documentation if relevant.
