docs/README.md, before:

# pixi: Package management made easy
![License][license-badge]
[![Build Status][build-badge]][build]
[![Project Chat][chat-badge]][chat-url]

[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-BSD--3--Clause-blue?style=flat-square
[build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/prefix-dev/pixi/rust.yml?style=flat-square&branch=main
[build]: https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/actions/
[chat-badge]: https://img.shields.io/discord/1082332781146800168.svg?label=&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff&color=7389D8&labelColor=6A7EC2&style=flat-square
[chat-url]: https://discord.gg/kKV8ZxyzY4

`pixi` is a universal package management tool designed to make installing and managing dependencies in Python, C++ and R using Conda packages.

`pixi` aims to provide AI/Data Science professionals the exceptional developer experience that is usually found with package managers like `cargo` or `yarn`.

`pixi` is completely written in Rust and build on top of the [rattler](https://github.com/mamba-org/rattler) library.

# Features

- Seamless integration with Python, C++ and R using Conda packages
- All os's: linux, windows, osx and osx-arm
- A clean and simple Cargo-like command-line interface.
- System-wide installation of Conda packages

# Installation

## Install from source
`pixi` is 100% written in Rust and therefor it can be installed, build and tested with cargo.
To start using `pixi` from a source build run:
```shell
cargo install --git https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi.git
```
or when you want to make changes use:
```shell
cargo build
cargo test
```
If you have any issues building because of the dependency on `rattler` checkout it's [compile steps](https://github.com/mamba-org/rattler/tree/main#give-it-a-try)

To get autocompletion run:
```shell
# On unix (MacOS or Linux), pick your shell (use `echo $SHELL` to find the shell you are using.):
echo 'eval "$(pixi completion --shell bash)"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'eval "$(pixi completion --shell zsh)"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'pixi completion --shell fish | source' >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
echo 'eval (pixi completion --shell elvish | slurp)' >> ~/.elvish/rc.elv

# On Windows:
Add-Content -Path $PROFILE -Value 'Invoke-Expression (&pixi completion --shell powershell)'
```
And then restart the shell or source the shell config file.

# Usage
The cli looks as follows:
```bash
➜ pixi -h
Usage: pixi [COMMAND]

Commands:
  completion  Generates a completion script for a shell
  init        Creates a new project
  add         Adds a dependency to the project
  run         Runs command in project
  install     Installs the defined package in a global accessible location
  help        Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Options:
  -h, --help  Print help
```
## Making a pixi project
Initialize a new project
```
pixi init myproject
```
Add the dependencies you want to use
```
cd myproject
pixi add cowpy
```
Run the installed package in its environment
```bash
pixi run cowpy Thanks for using pixi
```
For more information check [the documentation](getting_started.md#basics-of-the-configuration-file)

## Installing a conda package globally
You can also globally install conda packages into their own environment.
This behavior is similar to [`pipx`](https://github.com/pypa/pipx).
```bash
pixi install cowpy
```
For more examples check [the documentation](./examples.md#global-package-installation-in-isolation)

# Contribution 😍
We would absolutely love for you to contribute to `pixi`!
Whether you want to start an issue, fix a bug you encountered, or suggest an improvement, every contribution is greatly appreciated.

If you're just getting started with our project or stepping into the Rust ecosystem for the first time, we've got your back!
We recommend beginning with issues labeled as `good first issue`.
These are carefully chosen tasks that provide a smooth entry point into contributing.These issues are typically more straightforward and are a great way to get familiar with the project.

Got questions or ideas, or just want to chat? Join our lively conversations on Discord.
We're very active and would be happy to welcome you to our community. [Join our discord server today!][chat-url]

Commit message:

add examples to the project

docs/README.md, after:

# pixi: Package management made easy
![License][license-badge]
[![Build Status][build-badge]][build]
[![Project Chat][chat-badge]][chat-url]

[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-BSD--3--Clause-blue?style=flat-square
[build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/prefix-dev/pixi/rust.yml?style=flat-square&branch=main
[build]: https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/actions/
[chat-badge]: https://img.shields.io/discord/1082332781146800168.svg?label=&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff&color=7389D8&labelColor=6A7EC2&style=flat-square
[chat-url]: https://discord.gg/kKV8ZxyzY4

`pixi` is a universal package management tool designed to make installing and managing dependencies in Python, C++ and R using Conda packages.

`pixi` aims to provide AI/Data Science professionals the exceptional developer experience that is usually found with package managers like `cargo` or `yarn`.

`pixi` is completely written in Rust and build on top of the [rattler](https://github.com/mamba-org/rattler) library.

# Features

- Seamless integration with Python, C++ and R using Conda packages
- All os's: linux, windows, osx and osx-arm
- A clean and simple Cargo-like command-line interface.
- System-wide installation of Conda packages

# Installation

## Install from source
`pixi` is 100% written in Rust and therefor it can be installed, build and tested with cargo.
To start using `pixi` from a source build run:
```shell
cargo install --git https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi.git
```
or when you want to make changes use:
```shell
cargo build
cargo test
```
If you have any issues building because of the dependency on `rattler` checkout it's [compile steps](https://github.com/mamba-org/rattler/tree/main#give-it-a-try)

To get autocompletion run:
```shell
# On unix (MacOS or Linux), pick your shell (use `echo $SHELL` to find the shell you are using.):
echo 'eval "$(pixi completion --shell bash)"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'eval "$(pixi completion --shell zsh)"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'pixi completion --shell fish | source' >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
echo 'eval (pixi completion --shell elvish | slurp)' >> ~/.elvish/rc.elv

# On Windows:
Add-Content -Path $PROFILE -Value 'Invoke-Expression (&pixi completion --shell powershell)'
```
And then restart the shell or source the shell config file.

# Usage
The cli looks as follows:
```bash
➜ pixi -h
Usage: pixi [COMMAND]

Commands:
  completion  Generates a completion script for a shell
  init        Creates a new project
  add         Adds a dependency to the project
  run         Runs command in project
  install     Installs the defined package in a global accessible location
  help        Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)

Options:
  -h, --help  Print help
```
## Making a pixi project
Initialize a new project
```
pixi init myproject
```
Add the dependencies you want to use
```
cd myproject
pixi add cowpy
```
Run the installed package in its environment
```bash
pixi run cowpy Thanks for using pixi
```
For more information check [the documentation](getting_started.md#basics-of-the-configuration-file)

## Installing a conda package globally
You can also globally install conda packages into their own environment.
This behavior is similar to [`pipx`](https://github.com/pypa/pipx).
```bash
pixi install cowpy
```
For more examples check [the documentation](./examples.md#global-package-installation-in-isolation)

## Examples
Check the `examples` folder and find a project you want to try out!
It's as simple as running `pixi run start` in one of the folders!


# Contribution 😍
We would absolutely love for you to contribute to `pixi`!
Whether you want to start an issue, fix a bug you encountered, or suggest an improvement, every contribution is greatly appreciated.

If you're just getting started with our project or stepping into the Rust ecosystem for the first time, we've got your back!
We recommend beginning with issues labeled as `good first issue`.
These are carefully chosen tasks that provide a smooth entry point into contributing.These issues are typically more straightforward and are a great way to get familiar with the project.

Got questions or ideas, or just want to chat? Join our lively conversations on Discord.
We're very active and would be happy to welcome you to our community. [Join our discord server today!][chat-url]
